---
title: The Earthly and the Divine
date: "2020-05-01T22:12:03.284Z"
description: "A Response to Dan Jones' The Templars"
---

> The lunatic is all idée fixe, and whatever he comes across confirms his lunacy. You can tell him by the liberties he takes with common sense, by his flashes of inspiration, and by the fact that sooner or later he brings up the Templars.
> <br/>
>         - Umberto Eco


&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;If you started this book hoping for a great founding story, there could hardly be a more dramatic or meaningful location for a holy order to begin. The Templars get their name from the location where they were founded: [the Temple Mount](./temple-mount) in Jerusalem. There could hardly be a more spectacular place for a Holy order to come into being. On top of the ruins of King Solomon's divinely inspired temple, the location where Muhammad was assumed into Heaven, the spot where Christ gave his most famous address. You know the sermon on the mount? This is the mount. 
<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Two decades after the success of the First Crusade, it was still quite dangerous to travel to the [Holy Land](./FullMap). 
With the patronage of Bernard of Clairvaux, they began to thrive. When Bernard's disciple, Pope Innocent II, ascended to the papacy, he used a Papal bull to grant powers to the Templars. Already, the Templars were enmeshed of the network of favors and alliances that made up Medieval politics. The same network which would abruptly destroy them two hundred years later. For the moment, however, it was in their favor. Not only did the Pope endorse them, but granted them freedom from taxation in perpetuity. This feels like a crucial point. As important as their skill with weapons was this tax exemption. Over the next hundred years, the order would be granted land across Europe. So the organization founded by 9 knights in Jerusalem now had holdings across France, in Britain, in Germany. This meant that it needed an administrative system. 
Almost by accident, the Knights Templar had become one of the world's first large NGO's. Staying true to their strict monastic vows, they used this money only in pursuit of their mission in the Holy Lands. With this added power, though, this mission had to change. Now that the order had hundreds of members (consisting of not just knights, but sargents who fought but were not under the same restrictions as the knights), they were now the foremost Christian warriors in the East. Having dedicated their lives to living, serving, and fighting in the Holy Land, they acted as the local experts when novice Crusading armies arrived to participate in the latest quagmire. 
<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Despite occasional striking victories, the Templars would more often see the wars they fought end poorly. The simple reality was that the Crusading model was not a very effective way to win wars in the East. The Crusading armies may have been large, but they were often very divided coalitions which had plenty of in-fighting and who were not as used to the region as the armies they were fighting against. The Templars also had a tendency towards getting themselves massacred. While the Templars had a reputation for bravery, this often did them more harm than good. Maybe discretion really is the better part of valor. This feels like a good way to show the limits of courage. Yes, they may have been prepared to die for their cause, but they were often hasty to do that instead of taking a more reasonable course of action that may have led to actual victories.
<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Despite their losses on the battlefield, they were gaining massive power across Europe. As trusted third parties, they were ideal for negotiation between kings. They also had an extensive financial network and not only were they in charge of moving the Pope's money around, but they invented the traveller's check. When a king had to drum up some quick ransom money to secure his release, he turned to the nearby Templars. Much of the money the Templars had on hand happened to be money they were keeping safe for other monarchs. The Templars had sworn to protect this money and so they were not able to lend it out. However, they slyly informed the king that if he were to "take the money by force" they would have no choice but to give it to him and expect him to remunerate them at a later time. 
<br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Unfortunately, this financial power proved their undoing. One of the most dangerous crimes you can be guilty of is having something a despot wants and in the early 1300's, King Philip IV of France really wanted money. He began by expelling the Jewish population from his domain and seizing their assets. When this netted far less money than he had hoped, he turned on the Templars. With the grudging consent of the Pope he had under his thumb, King Philip IV had dozens of Templars arrested on Friday the 13th, 1307. Philip's inquisitors would torture these Templars until they confessed to all sorts of sordid crimes. This persecution would prove the end of the order. Many Templars would be imprisoned, some would be burned at the stake, others would be forced to join other orders.       <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I love the idea of mysterious orders that operate outside the laws of the world we are used to. It's endlessly exciting to imagine secret gatherings, sworn oaths, the powers that be which sit above the rest of the world pulling our strings without our knowing it. In the case of the Templars, though, the powers that be simply aren't. The powers don't be. What's interesting to me about them is how very controlled by the simple, mundane laws that you can learn in any undergraduate Economics or History class. What's interesting about the Templars isn't that they hold immense behind the scenes power, as imagined by Dan Brown in *the Da Vinci Code* or by Ubisoft in the *Assassin's Creed* games, but that their simple ideals are so utterly under the sway of the very earthly powers you and I learned in our introductory [economics](./admission) or history classes. 